Sequence numbers are disabled in TSDS (#6145)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md

`gauge`
:   A metric that represents a single numeric that can arbitrarily increase or decrease. For example, a temperature or available disk space. A gauge is supported by all [numeric field types](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/number.md) and [`aggregate_metric_double`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/aggregate-metric-double.md) (for internal use during downsampling, rarely user-populated).

> `histogram` {applies_to}`stack: preview 9.3` {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` 

Author: @JonasKunz fyi

* {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.3` **Doc values skippers:** A TSDS enables [docvalue skippers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/doc-values.md#doc-values-skippers) on its `_tsid`, `@timestamp`, [dimension](#time-series-dimension), and [metric](#time-series-metric) fields. Because `tsid` and `@timestamp` are part of the index sort, the skippers allow \{\{es}} to avoid building backing indexes for these fields, meaning lower disk usage and faster ingest speed.
* {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` **Sequence numbers are disabled:** A TSDS [disables sequence numbers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/index-modules.md#index-disable-sequence-numbers) by default to substantially improve storage efficiency (up to 2x) and indexing throughput (10%). 

>   When sequence numbers are disabled, [optimistic concurrency control](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/optimistic-concurrency-control.md) gets disabled, and [update-by-query]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-update-by-query) and [delete-by-query]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-delete-by-query) operations execute with weaker consistency. These capabilities are normally not relevant for time series workloads, but if you need them for your application, you can restore sequence numbers by setting `index.disable_sequence_numbers: false` in the index template of the relevant TSDS.

Reviewer: based on your reply 

```suggestion
  When sequence numbers are disabled, [optimistic concurrency control](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/optimistic-concurrency-control.md) gets disabled, causing [update-by-query]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-update-by-query) and [delete-by-query]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-delete-by-query) operations to execute with weaker consistency. These capabilities are normally not relevant for time series workloads, but if you need them for your application, you can restore sequence numbers by setting `index.disable_sequence_numbers: false` in the index template of the relevant TSDS.
```

* **Dimension-based routing:** The routing logic uses dimension fields to map all data points of a time series to the same shard, improving storage efficiency and query performance. Duplicate data points are rejected.
* **Sorting:** A TSDS uses internal [index sorting](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/sorting.md) to order shard segments by `_tsid` and `@timestamp`, for better compression. Time series data streams do not use `index.sort.*` settings.
* **Source field:** A TSDS uses [synthetic `_source`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md#synthetic-source), and as a result is subject to some [restrictions](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md#synthetic-source-restrictions) and [modifications](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md#synthetic-source-modifications) applied to the `_source` field.

> * {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.3` **Doc value Skippers:** A TSDS enables [docvalue skippers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/doc-values.md#doc-values-skippers) on its `_tsid`, `@timestamp`, [dimension](#time-series-dimension), and [metric](#time-series-metric) fields. Because `tsid` and `@timestamp` are part of the index sort, the skippers allow \{\{es}} to avoid building backing indexes for these fields, meaning lower disk usage and faster ingest speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.3` **Doc values skippers:** A TSDS enables [docvalue skippers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/doc-values.md#doc-values-skippers) on its `_tsid`, `@timestamp`, [dimension](#time-series-dimension), and [metric](#time-series-metric) fields. Because `tsid` and `@timestamp` are part of the index sort, the skippers allow \{\{es}} to avoid building backing indexes for these fields, meaning lower disk usage and faster ingest speed.
```

> * {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` **Sequence numbers are disabled:** A TSDS [disables sequence numbers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/index-modules.md#index-disable-sequence-numbers) by default to substantially improve storage efficiency (up to 2x) and indexing throughput (10%). The downside is that [Optimistic Concurrency Control](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/optimistic-concurrency-control.md) gets disabled and [update-by-query](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/update-by-query-api.md) and [delete-by-query](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/operation/operation-delete-by-query.md) operations execute with weaker consistency. These are normally not relevant for time series workloads, but if you need them for your application (and you are willing to pay the extra cost in storage and indexing resources), you can restore sequence numbers by setting `index.disable_sequence_numbers: false` in the index template of the involved TSDS.

Reviewer: not sure if I love "willing to pay the extra cost in storage and indexing resources" - we tell them what they get above, and I think it's intuitive that they'll lose it if they enable seq numbers. suggest we remove it

out of curiosity, do those operations execute with weaker consistency _because_ OCC is off? if so, we can switch this to "... gets disabled, leading x and y operations to execute ..."

this edit fixes your link (format is different for the api reference - `{{es-apis}}/<path>` expands to `https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/<path>`). we can use the same link type for both api links for consistency.

```suggestion
* {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` **Sequence numbers are disabled:** A TSDS [disables sequence numbers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/index-modules.md#index-disable-sequence-numbers) by default to substantially improve storage efficiency (up to 2x) and indexing throughput (10%). 

  When sequence numbers are disabled, [optimistic concurrency control](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/optimistic-concurrency-control.md) gets disabled, and [update-by-query]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-update-by-query) and [delete-by-query]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-delete-by-query) operations execute with weaker consistency. These capabilities are normally not relevant for time series workloads, but if you need them for your application, you can restore sequence numbers by setting `index.disable_sequence_numbers: false` in the index template of the relevant TSDS.
```

Author: Thanks Shaina. Indeed the *-by-query operations have weaker consistency because they can no longer use OCC internally. I applied your suggestions, lemme know if there are more.
